This is chapter 22 in our continuing story that follows on from the race riots of 1919 in Wales and across the rest of England.
Chapter 22. India, the beginning of the collapse of empire.
Quote from Mahatma Gandhi.
First they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then they fight you, then you win.
In 1960 the Prime Minister of Great Britain, Harold Milk Millen, delivered a famous speech known as the Wind of Change.
In that speech he said,
Many countries there of different races and civilisation pressed their claim to an independent national life.
Today the same thing is happening in Africa.
In different places it may take different forms, but it is happening everywhere.
The wind of change is blowing through the continent.
Whether we like it or not, this growth of national consciousness is a political fact.
We must accept it as a fact.
Now in India there were numerous uprisings and conflicts that erupted over the course of the centuries, the centuries long British occupation.
But it wasn't until Mahandas Mahatma Gandhi's social efforts began, beginning in India from 1915 to 1920 and onward,
that a popular vision for India began to spread amongst ordinary Indians.
At the time Gandhi had only recently returned from South Africa, where he had stayed for more than 20 years.
As the voice and conscience of thousands of racially subjugated Indians upon his return to India,
Gandhi advocated for Indians to boycott British institutions and products in a non-violent way.
This movement was ultimately known as Swadeshi.
India suffered a significant cost during World War I.
Over one million Indian troops served overseas, of whom 62,000 at least died and another 67,000 were wounded.
In total at least 74,187 Indian soldiers died during World War I.
In World War I the Indian army fought against the German Empire in Germany,
Germany East Africa I should say, and on the Western Front.
Indian men were also a significant part of Mercantile Marine, later to be called the Merchant Navy.
Unfortunately we cannot say how many died, many of those died because the British government destroyed those records after the war.
During the First World War these seamen replaced British mariners recruited into the Royal Navy.
The Laskers, which is what Indian merchant seamen were first known as and that spread to other seamen,
were paid a fraction of white cruise wages.
And along with other overseas sailors such as African and Caribbean people suffered harsh treatment.
Received inferior rations and mostly worked in cramped, hot, badly ventilated areas below deck.
The Laskers, as I said, slang for Indian seamen, comprised an estimated 17.5% of mariners on British registered ships.
Some 51,000 men, according to Historic England.
There is a monument erected by the shipping companies and mercantile community of Calcutta
to the memory of 896 seamen of Bengal, Assam and Upper India who lost their lives in the service to the British Empire in the Great War of 1914-18.
The SS Maloa is an example.
It was a requisitioned liner carrying military and civilian passengers en route to Bombay.
It sank, causing the death of 122 passengers, 85 Lasker crew.
It was the greatest single loss of Indian merchant seamen in the war.
The names of 63 of those are remembered at the Commonwealth War Grades Commission Bombay Memorial.
This memorial commemorates 1708 members of the Indian Merchant Service,
which was separate from the UK Merchant Navy, and a further 498 from the Royal Indian Marine, the Royal Navy and the Mercantile Marine Reserve.
So we don't know the numbers of Indians at sea who died, but we know it was significant.
Repatriation was sought after the war, but it wasn't effective.
The local councils, the police, the government, once the merchant seamen in particular,
but the others from the Empire had served their purpose in World War I, wanted them to go home.
So they sought to repatriate, but it wasn't effective. Some had families.
And so a new measure was introduced that required black workers to provide documentary proof of British nationality.
A requirement that was impossible for thousands of seafarers born in British colonial Africa, the Caribbean, Middle East, India and Malaysia.
Many of which could not write.
This practice was subsequently incorporated into the special restriction Coloured Seamen Order in 1925, described as the whitewashing of Britain.
The order set the policy direction of the British government with regard to black workers, far beyond that time period.
This group of merchant seamen and those from the armed forces that had fought for the Empire,
but came home to exactly the same conditions they had left, contribute to an angry India and an angry British Empire.
That significantly diluted the non-violent nature of Gandhi's revolution.
Merchant seamen, for example, from the Punjab, were largely Muslims and they were largely underclass within the class system, some even being untouchables.
Furthermore, the behaviour of the British government's local representatives became more punitive after the war because of their fear of uprising.
One major event that directly affected Sikhs and Muslims in particular is still a stain on their history and helped to destroy Empire.
The Jallinwalabagh Massacre, also known as the Amritsar Massacre, took place on the 13th of April 1919.
When Acting Brigadier General Reginald Dyer ordered troops of the British Army to fire their rifles into a crowd of unarmed civilians in Jallinwalabagh,
killing at least 400 people, including men and women, over 1,000 people were injured.
Those people were on a peaceful, mainly religious march.
There is a plaque in Amritsar which sums it up.
Notice, this place is saturated with the blood of thousands of Indian patriots who were martyred in a non-violent struggle to free India from British domination.
General Dyer and the British Army opened fire here on unarmed people.
Jallinwalabagh is thus an everlasting symbol of non-violent and peaceful struggle for freedom of Indian people and the tyranny of the British.
India's actions led the movement to end the British Empire that was to conclude in its collapse after World War II.
Hence the Wind of Change speech. But Africa, China, the Caribbean and the Middle East soon followed India.
The race riots and the behaviour of government was a part of a turning point in history, as Lord Milner predicted.
This is a quote from Peter Fryer, 1984, The Staying Power book.
The Colonial Secretary Lord Milner pointed out that many of the black men attacked in the riots had served in the Army, Navy and Merchant Service during the war and bitterly resented the ingratitude shown in the attacks.
He feared the effect their return to the colonies would have on attitudes to white minorities there and his fears were soon justified.
It's quite true that racial feeling is rising in World War I, as elsewhere the causes are many.
The participation of coloured men in the war, slights and insults received by them mainly from Dominion troops on account of their colour, the USA race troubles, Liverpool and Cardiff riots and in addition the general unrest all over the world.
I think the trouble is a fact to be faced and there is no special remedy for it.
We can provide against disorder, improve conditions and be careful over questions of race, but nothing we can do will alter the fact that the black man has begun to think and feel himself as good as the white.
Gilbert Grindle, later to be Sir Gilbert Grindle, 22nd October 1919, Colonial Office Memo.
So the race riots in 1919 in their own way had a longer lasting effect in a few days in June and led to a group of people returning unhappy, angry and a tidal wave of change across the empire.